Its beautiful parks.
Its majestic orchards.
A notable library.
A powerful guild.
The smell of baked bread.
The sounds of blacksmiths working.
The abundance of game in the surrounding land.
The extensive farmland surrounding it.
Its exotic goods.
The slums.
Its criminal syndicate.
Its high-class brothels.
Its ban on prostitution.
That it is protected by thick stone walls.
That it stands atop a floating mote of earth.
Its visible magic wards, which repel monsters.
That it is constantly besieged.
That it is ruled by a tyrant.
The law is enforced harshly.
The lack of government; anarchy reigns.
A large temple.
A gated cemetery larger than is warranted.
A system of tunnels beneath the settlement.
A planar gate.
A powerful curse.
That adventurers are hated by the people.
A mysterious obelisk towers over other buildings.
A famous entertainer inhabits the settlement.
That magic is hated by the people.
Its heavily armed, well-trained guards.
The tamed monster that defends it.
A well-traveled trade route that runs through it.
Its "friendly" barmaids.
The local ale distillery.
A keep of a noble lord.
A tower in which a princess is locked up.
That it's overrun with pests.
That it's in an economic depression.
That it's being extorted by an intelligent monster.
A group of refugees tenting near the settlement.
That it's on the path of a gypsy caravan.
That a traveling carnival often passes through.
The nearby vineyards.
Its history as a battleground.
Its proximity to a monster stronghold.
A wishing well with a local legend.
That it is built in a dead magic zone.
That it is built in a wild magic zone.
That it was the site of a mythic event.
That it was built atop ancient ruins.
A statue honoring some long-dead hero.
An abundance of a particular animal.
A shrine to an evil god.
An affordable periodical carrying news of the realm.
A peaceful cult.
Its wide streets.
Its incredibly beautiful architecture.
Its patronage of the arts.
The nearby academy of magic.
The rare herbs that grow nearby.
The use of glowing crystal as streetlamps.
The settlement's astronomy observatory.
A bridge that spans a wide river.
The fiercely patriotic inhabitants.
A gallows erected in the main square.
A genial ghost.
Its "no-weapons" policy.
A corrupt politician.
Regular raids by a nearby group of bandits.
That it was founded by cannibals, and some continue the tradition.
That it's actually a bandit base.
That all light except sunlight is smothered.
That it was the location of a pirate's unclaimed treasure hoard.
The nearby mines.
A history of assassinations.
Its very progressive attitude.
Its staunch conservative attitude.
Its incompetent buffoon of a leader.
Its paranoia.
Its xenophobia.
Its tolerance of others.
A coven of witches as rulers.
Its predominantly male population.
Its predominantly female population.
Its high concentration of children.
Its noticeable lack of children.
Its connection to the Feywild.
Its connection to the Shadowfell.
Its grimy feel.
The stench of sewage.
A river that divides it.
The undead servants that perform labor.
That it's the center of a manhunt.
A pony mascot with an adorable name.
The overpowering smell of sulfur.
A low hum that permeates the settlement with no known cause.
A thousand-year-old tree in town square.
That it is under the protection of friendly elemental spirits.
The blistering heat of its forges.
Its famous impartiality.